---
layout: post
title: ei or ie?
tags: ["usage"]
---

Have you ever confused the spelling "ei" with the spelling "ie"? For example, can you immediately tell which is correct, "receive" or "recieve"? To be honest, sometimes I was not 100% percent sure which was right.

As for the two spellings "ei" and "ie" pronounced as /i/, there is a simple rule: "I before E except after C"[^wiki]. This is a well-known mnemonic rule for correct spelling. Precisely speaking, the rule is as follows.
- "ei": right after the letter "c"
- "ie": otherwise

Almost all the spellings of common words follow this rule. For example:
- ceiling, receive, deceive, receipt
- achieve, believe, relieve, sieve

Of course, there are some exceptions. Looking at [the list of the exceptions](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Category:English_words_not_following_the_I_before_E_except_after_C_rule), however, I didn't find many words that we really need to pay attention to. Let me share them a little bit.

## seize, weird, sheik
In my opinion, these three words[^weird-pron] are definitely exceptions that we need to be careful with (if you know that some people pronounce "sheik" as /ʃeɪk/, then sheik is not really confusing).

## protein, caffeine, codeine
Chemical names often have an "ei" spelling, pronounced /i/. These may be confusing, especially for native speakers[^urban-caffiene], but in Japanese, we have the corresponding words, プロテイン, カフェイン, コデイン, respectively, which tell us clearly how they are spelled.

## obeisance
Obeisance[^obeisance-pron] can be thought of as an exception. But it is obviously derived from the word "obey", so it cannot be "obiesance".

## onomatopoeia
Onomatopoeia[^onomatopoeia-pron] can be regarded as an exception as well, but this spelling is a bit odd in the first place anyway.

## species
I don't think this is so confusing because "-ies" fits better than "-eis" at the end of the word.

## heinous
If you pronounce this word as /ˈhiːnəs/, the spelling may be confusing. But I didn't even know that this word could be pronounced this way (and just to make sure, I checked <https://youglish.com/pronounce/heinous/english/us>).

## leisure, either (neither)
It is well-known that these words are also pronounced as /ˈlɛʒər/, /ˈaɪðər/ (/ˈnaɪðər/), respectively, from which we can figure out the spellings (really?).

---

[^wiki]: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_before_E_except_after_C>
[^weird-pron]: though weird doesn't have /i/ sound (/wɪrd/)
[^urban-caffiene]: <https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=caffiene>
[^onomatopoeia-pron]: U.S. /ˈˌɑnəˌmædəˈpiə/
[^obeisance-pron]: U.S. /oʊˈbis(ə)ns/ (or /oʊˈbeɪs(ə)ns/)

