---
layout: post
title: Video
tags: ["etymology"]
---

The English word "video" comes from the Latin "videō", which means "I see".
This word has so many descendants in English, so let me see the common words among them.
Some of them are not really close to "videō" in form, because there are many other related words such as "vīsō" (the intensive form of videō) or "vīsiō" (noun form).

## improvise, provide
The word "improvise" has three components, "im-" (meaning "not"), "pro" (meaning "in advance", e.g., seen in "prophecy"), and videō. Hence, it means "not seeing in advance", which makes perfect sense to me.
The transition of the meanings of the word "provide" is also understandable: "to see in the future" -> "to prepare" -> "to supply".

## evident
This is the combination of the prefix "ex-" meaning "out"[^ex-past-post] and videō.

## advise, revise, supervise
These words have the sense of "to look at something or someone carefully" in common.

## view, visible, vision
These are directly related to "see".

## visit
This word comes from the word "vīsitō" meaning "I go to see".
The word vīsitō is [the frequentative form](https://koki-yamaguchi.github.io/2021/11/02/frequentative.html) of vīsō, which makes sense.
I like the fact that the letter "t" remains in the word "visit" as a frequentative form, because I have seen the same pattern before in the word "palpitate", which can be considered as the frequentative form of "palpō"[^palp-post].

## wise, wit, witness
These words ultimately share the origin with videō, which is the Proto-Indo-European "*weyd-", meaning "to see".

---

[^ex-past-post]: The prefix "ex-" becomes "e-" before the letter "v". If you want to know about this further, take a quick look at [my past post](https://koki-yamaguchi.github.io/2021/11/12/ex.html).
[^palp-post]: I wrote about "palp" in [this post](https://koki-yamaguchi.github.io/2021/10/20/palp.html).