---
layout: post
title: Be-
tags: ["prefix"]
---

The other day, I realized that there is a relationship between the words *beseech* and *seek*.
To be honest, I have never really thought about *be* as a prefix before.
When I think about it, however, there are so many English words that start in *be-*.
In this post, let me share a bit about some common words with this prefix.

There seem to be various explanations for the formation, depending on the source.
The following is basically based on the OED[^oed-be].

## about
First of all, the original meaning of *be-* is "about".
I didn't notice that there are so many prepositions starting in *be-*, which are usually based on the meaning "about" or "near".

For example, there are *before*, *behind*, *below*, *beneath*, *benorth*, *besouth*, *between*, *beyond*, *beside*.

## all about
This prefix *be-* is used as "all about" or "thoroughly".
In other word, it functions as an intensifying prefix.

e.g. *beseech* (from *seek*), *bedazzle* (from *dazzle*)

## forms figurative verbs
Also, this prefix can render figurative verbs as well.

e.g. *become* (figuratively *come*), *behave* (figuratively *have*), *behold* (figuratively *hold*)

## changes intransitive verbs to transitive
*Be-* also functions to render an intransitive verb transitive.

e.g. *bemoan* (*moan* over), *bewail* (*wail* over)

## implies a privative force
*Be-* can imply the sense of deprivation as well.

e.g. *bereave*, *benumb*

---

[^oed-be]: "be-, prefix." OED Online. Oxford University Press, December 2021. Web. 25 December 2021.
