---
layout: post
title: Tenuis
tags: ["etymology"]
---

I wrote about the Latin "macer" in [the past post](https://koki-yamaguchi.github.io/2021/12/06/macer.html), meaning "thin".
But what about the etymology of the word "thin" itself?

It ultimately comes from the PIE "*ténh₂us", meaning "thin", and this word has a Latin descendant "tenuis", which also means "thin" or "weak".
Here are some more English words derived from "tenuis".

## tenuis
The word "tenuis"[^tenuis-pron] itself remains in English, which is only used in the context of linguistics.
Tenuis is one of the Greek letters κ, τ, π, or the corresponding k, t, p of Latin and English.
They are called "tenuis consonant", and the following explanation from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tenuis_consonant) is helpful (albeit simplistic) to understand what they are:

> voiced β δ γ /b d ɡ/, aspirate φ θ χ /pʰ tʰ kʰ/, and tenuis π τ κ /p˭ t˭ k˭/.

## tenuos
This word obviously comes from "tenuis" and means "thin, weak, and easily broken", which totally makes sense.

## attenuate
Pretty common English word "attenuate" is composed of "ad-" and "tenuis" (or "tenuō", meaning "I make thin").
This word means "to make thin or weak", and is often used interchangeably with "reduce".

## extenuate
The word extenuate means "to make thin" or "to diminish the extent".
The Cambridge Dictionary defines this word as "to cause a wrong act to be judged less seriously by giving reasons for it"[^camb-extenuate].
It seems to be used today, but personally I have never heard anyone said this word.

---

[^tenuis-pron]: /ˈtɛnjuːɪs/
[^camb-extenuate]: <https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/extenuate>