---
layout: post
title: Pes
tags: ["etymology"]
---

The Latin word for "foot" is *pēs* (plural *pedēs*) (in the nominative case).
There are so many English descendants derived from this word, so let's look at some of them.

## figuratively feet
The word *expedite* means "to make something happen more quickly", which can be considered as "to unfetter".
*Expedient*[^expedient-pron] and *expedition* have kind of similar meanings.
On the contrary, the words *impede* and *impeach* can be interpreted as "to fetter".

The word *pioneer* also comes from the same origin, which originally meant "a foot soldier".

## treatment for human feet
- *pedicure* (cf. *manicure*)
- *podiatry* (the branch of medicine that deals with the foot)

## with numeral prefix
Some words contain the numeral prefix and usually mean something specific.

- *biped*[^biped-pron] (two-footed animal)
- *tripod*[^tripod-pron][^bipod] (usually refers to "a three-legged stand for supporting a camera")
- *centipede*, *millipede*

## related physically moving feet
- *pedal*
- *pedestrian*
- *velocipede*[^velocipede-pron] (a human-powered land vehicle)

## others
The word *pedigree*[^pedigree-pron] comes from the Old French *pié de gru* ("foot of a crane"), probably because a pedigree and a foot of a crane are similar in appearance.
*Cephalopod*[^cephalopod-pron] is composed of *cephalo-* (meaning "head", cf., *hydrocephalus*) and feet, which explains what cephalopod refers to.
Octopus and squid are classified as cephalopods.

---

[^expedient-pron]: U.S. /ɪkˈspiː.di.ənt/
[^biped-pron]: U.S. /ˈbaɪˌpɛd/
[^tripod-pron]: U.S. /ˈtraɪˌpɑd/
[^bipod]: The term *bipod* seems to exist and means "a two-legged stand".
[^velocipede-pron]: U.S. /vəˈlɑsəˌpid/
[^pedigree-pron]: U.S. /ˈpɛdəˌɡri/
[^cephalopod-pron]: U.S. /ˈsɛfələpɒd/
